1	Leaving and cleaving	A thriving couple puts into practice Genesis 2:24: “For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be united to his wife.” They leave their dependency on Mom and Dad, the single lifestyle, and personal issues and learn how to cleave and unite with their new spouse.
2	Making a lifelong commitment	A thriving couple understands that divorce is not an option and that marriage is a lifelong adventure. They have the same attitude toward each other as God has toward us: “I have loved you with an everlasting love” (Jeremiah 31:3).
3	Honoring each other	A thriving couple intentionally honors each other. They seek to “be devoted to one another in . . . love [and] honor one another above [themselves]” (Romans 12:10). They recognize that the key to keeping their hearts open to each other is to view one another as a priceless treasure, “for where your treasure is, there your heart will be also” (Matthew 6:21).
4	Sharing spiritual intimacy	A thriving couple has a deep, shared faith. They consciously regard Christ as the bedrock of their relationship. Their relationship is “built on the foundation of the apostles and prophets,  with Christ Jesus himself as the chief cornerstone” (Ephesians 2:20), and together they daily pursue an intimate relationship with Christ.
5	Engaging in mutually satisfying physical intimacy	A thriving couple regularly celebrates their marriage with passionate sexual intimacy, joining together to “become one flesh” (Genesis 2:24). They regard sex not as a chore or an obligation but as a delightful dance in which each spouse puts the other’s needs and interests ahead of his or her own.
6	Fostering positive communication	A thriving couple knows that communication is the lifeblood of a vibrant relationship. They spend time every day in conversation to know each other and to be known by their partner, recognizing that one day they “shall know fully, even as [they are] fully known” (1 Corinthians 13:12).
7	Valuing differences	A thriving couple realizes that God created men and women differently— and that’s a very good thing! Genesis tells us that “God saw all that he had made, and it was very good” (1:31). A thriving couple understands that their differences (gender, personality, family of origin, etc.) can cause conflict, but they’re never the problem; instead, it’s attempting to manage these differences that creates many of the challenges they face in their marriage.
8	Creating realistic expectations	A thriving couple realizes that they have many expectations— things they want, hope, wish, and expect will happen in their marriage. However, unclear or unrealistic expectations cause many challenges within a marriage. Therefore, a thriving couple spends regular time talking through what they expect and finding win- win solutions for unrealistic expectations. The apostle Paul knew the secret to a win- win approach to expectations: “Each of you should look not only to your own interests, but also to the interests of others” (Philippians 2:4).
9	Practicing healthy conflict management	A thriving couple recognizes that conflict is inevitable. They know that the secret of their success lies in the way they manage conflict, and they embrace the concept that God uses this bumping and jarring to cause them to grow—“As iron sharpens iron, so one [person] sharpens another” (Proverbs 27:17). Instead of avoiding conflict, they believe that healthy conflict is the doorway to intimacy and deeper connection.
10	Sharing responsibility as a team	A thriving couple finds ways to resolve the issue of male and female roles between themselves. They hammer out a plan that preserves fairness and equity in the way they divide household tasks and responsibilities. They try to outserve each other every day, and they strive to READY TO WED 12
be unified, to “bear one another’s burdens” (Galatians 6:2, esv), and to function as a team. Their goal is to “have unity of mind, sympathy, brotherly love, a tender heart, and a humble mind” (1 Peter 3:8).
11	Pursuing financial peace and harmony	A thriving couple understands that the number one conflict in marriage is money, and that “the love of money is a root of all kinds of evil” (1 Timothy 6:10). They take time to understand their different money personalities and how to make financial decisions as a team.
12	Coping with stress and crises	A thriving couple expects that they will face challenges and painful trials in the course of their marriage. The Scriptures make this fact clear: “Dear friends, don’t be surprised at the fiery trials you are going through, as if something strange were happening to you” (1 Peter 4:12, nlt). They learn how to manage the stress and challenges that are inevitable, especially during their first year of marriage.
